the future remember to keep making
covert safe choices
like maintaining physical distancing
practicing good hygiene
and wearing a mask when needed to
protect others stay at home when unwell
and get tested for covert 19 keep the
covert safe app active
so you can be contacted if needed
together let's keep going and stay
safe find out more at health.gov.eu
authorised by the australian government
canberra
[Applause]
what do you know about what i want to
achieve
[Music]
[Applause]
know the the cultural bird brings the
land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gundangara person is
protecting country for future
generations
know the languages reporting from our
country lara kia country
reporting from ghana country reporting
from pinmatech from larakir country
i'm on your toyota country from nepaluna
lutrowita
for abc news know the meaning i
in this country this country is me know
the story with
abc news
today mass testing underway as the
number of covert cases in sydney's
northern beaches grows to five
the last couple of days has been a very
telling reminder that we are living in
the middle of the band
[Music]
signs the economy is rebounding faster
than expected with the warning the road
ahead
won't be easy victoria's government
projects calls to apologize
after its lockdown of public housing
towers was found to have breached
residents human rights
[Applause]
and australia off to a strong start in
the first test against india
at the adelaide oval
hello and welcome to abc news i'm
kirsten aiken
there are growing concerns in new south
wales with a fifth case of covert 19
identified in sydney's north health
authorities believe all five cases on
the city's northern beaches
are linked reporter rani hayman has more
we have one additional case that has
been identified by new south wales
health
this afternoon and that is in a person
from
the northern beaches and they are the
partner of a woman in her
50s who tested positive earlier on today
that woman worked as a residential aged
care worker at the pit water palms
retirement village
in avalon and she is one of
two people who tested positive today a
man
in his another man also tested positive
and he was
a drummer in a band abandon he's from
french's forest
now the retirement village that the
woman worked at
has been closed to visitors as contact
tracing
is underway to determine whether anybody
else has been
infected by this woman but as a result
of these
new cases here today the penrose rsl
the avalon rsl club and the curability
club
have all been put on alert and anyone
who visited
the avalon rsl club on the 11th of
december
the penrith rsl on the 13th of december
and the curability club
on the 14th of december are being
advised to go and get tested
for the virus and to self-isolate for 14
days
we heard from the new south wales health
minister brad hazard earlier here's what
he had to say
these people who come forward have come
forward as heroes
to put themselves there and to be tested
and now they're doing what they need to
do
the last couple of days has been a very
telling reminder that we are living in
the middle of a pandemic
certainly i've been out about the last
couple of weeks and i've seen people
everywhere far more complacent than i've
seen them since literally january this
year
um so in a sense this is a reminder to
us
um it's some sort of force giving a
reminder to all of us that uh
we're in the middle of a pandemic ronnie
what action
is the state government taking
that's right as the new south wales
health minister brad hazard said there
we are in the middle of a pandemic so
new south wales health are now
undergoing urgent genome sequencing to
try to
discover what the source of these
infections is
we do know that the health minister the
chief health officer kerry chant has
said that we are expecting some lab
results to come through at seven o'clock
tonight so
hopefully from then on we should have
some more detail and here's what she had
to say a bit earlier on today
we need to find the source of the
infection that's why the genome
sequencing is going to be so critical
it will help us identify what the
nature of the virus is and
whether it is the locally acquired
strain whether it's the strain that's
associated with any of the recent
transmission events so it will be a
critical piece
and we will be able to update you later
this evening
and so ronnie is there any new advice to
people in the lead-up to christmas
so the main advice to people in new
south wales is obviously to get tested
and to stay on top of whether they do
have symptoms go and get tested we've
seen
hundreds of people going to the northern
beaches
testing clinics this morning to go and
get tested
as per the advice of new south wales
health we know as a result of these new
infections that hundreds of people have
now potentially gone
into isolation and that would mean that
there may be some people who will be in
isolation
over christmas so the new south wales
health minister brad hazard has said
although that will be difficult for some
families it is important that people
stay
on top of the health measures as we come
into the christmas period
wa's premier mark mcgowan has warned
there is the prospect the state's hard
border with new south wales could be
reinstated
but says no decision will be made until
it's not whether there's been
significant spread of the virus
mr mcgowan says flights can continue
arriving in perth from new south wales
today
as the number of cases currently poses a
very low risk
if we need to we'll put up a hard border
with new south wales
we won't hesitate to that to do that if
the medical advice says
that that is what is required i realize
that would be very upsetting
very upsetting for many people uh but if
the medical advice says
that's what we need to do to protect
western australia we will do it
and we'll do it immediately so we're
just awaiting clarity on the situation
new south wales we'll do what we have to
do
uh to keep having a great record in wa
and keep the health and
welfare of west australia's paramount
the new cases in sydney are also causing
concern regarding the new south wales
queensland border that state's deputy
premier stephen miles says the state is
monitoring the situation
closely we will over the next 24 hours
and monitor
that very closely we would urge anyone
anyone in queensland
who has been in that northern beaches
region
from the 13th of december onwards to go
to the new south wales health alerts
and see if they were in any of the
locations where they have issued
health alerts where those people who
have now
tested positive have been and tasmanian
authorities have now
issued a travel alert for specific
locations across
five sydney suburbs people who visited
the venues in the last week
have been told to self-isolate and
contact public health
future new south wales arrivals will
have their entry pass
to tasmania cancelled they'll have to
reapply
and confirm they haven't visited the
high risk
locations we'll bring you more on that
as we get it
now a news justine a man shot dead by
queensland police on a motorway this
morning was previously investigated by a
counter-terrorism task force and was
wearing
a gps monitoring device queensland
police were called to the logan motorway
at drew vale on brisbane's south side
after reports from the public about
someone walking on the road
police say he pulled a knife on officers
before he was shot
they say he was on bail and was stopped
from leaving the country
last year in 2019 the deceased who we
suspect was influenced by islamic state
attempted to depart brisbane
international airport for somalia
he was stopped and arrested on suspicion
of an attempted foreign incursion
the deceased was released without charge
due to insufficient evidence
however his passport was subsequently
cancelled
in june 2019 he was charged with further
offenses including refusing to hand over
his passcode to a mobile phone his
mobile phone
he was remanded in custody when he
refused
to answer the magistrate or acknowledge
the authority
of the court he applied for and was
granted bill on
3rd of september of this year the
queensland joint counterterrorism team
opposed bail on the grounds he would
interfere with witnesses
obstruct justice and fail to appear
the australian economy has rebounded
more quickly than expected with treasury
now forecasting it will grow in this
financial year
rather than shrink but the treasurer is
warning australia
is not out of the woods just yet ten
weeks after handing down the federal
budget josh freidenberg has released the
mid-year update showing higher gdp
and a lower deficit political reporter
jay norman has more from parliament
house
it's not super surprising given that in
recent weeks we've seen lockdowns lifted
restrictions being eased and
borders reopening across the country as
the treasurer said today
australians are back spending back
working and back traveling and
as a result of that treasury is now
expecting that this financial year the
economy will actually
grow albeit by a very very small amount
but that's certainly a turnaround
because just 10 weeks ago treasury was
forecasting that the economy would
contract by 1.5 in this financial year
now the figures today as you mentioned
um are largely better than
expected the economy is rebounding a bit
faster than
forecast uh the deficit while still at
an incredibly
high watering level is lower than what
was forecast as 10 weeks ago so
down from a forecast 214 billion dollars
now it's expected to be about 198
billion dollars now that's for a few
reasons
firstly iron ore prices are surging so
that is
massively helping the budget bottom line
secondly the job keeper wage
subsidy program has had less demand than
expected so fewer workers than forecast
are actually accessing that wage subsidy
meaning the government is
saving a few billion dollars on that
program
the unemployment rate too it's largely
around
what was forecast but the government is
now expecting that it will recover
to pre-covert levels more quickly than
expected to drop below
that sixth figure in 2022-23 which is a
little bit
faster than anticipated so josh
reidenberg today in announcing and
revealing
these figures said of course it is
welcome news as we head towards
christmas few people expected that we'd
be in this position it's certainly a
much better position than many
comparable countries overseas
but he warned there is a great deal of
uncertainty still in the economy
and a number of risks to these
relatively good figures or better than
expected history had to say
there do however remain downside risks
to australia's economic recovery
these include the timing the
distribution
and the effectiveness of the vaccine in
stopping the spread of the virus
globally trade tensions
that limit australia's access to
international
export markets and domestic economic
uncertainty that could lead to higher
household savings
and lower consumption levels so there is
a very tough road ahead
jane what are the forecasts for
unemployment looking like
yeah this is the figure that most
australians would probably be interested
in it's all about
jobs now there's a slight improvement
not a massive improvement so the
unemployment rate was expected to
peak in this december quarter at eight
percent it's now expected to peak in
march next year at seven and a half
percent so that is a little bit of an
improvement
um and as i mentioned the government is
expecting the unemployment rate to
return to pre-covered levels in four
years time which is a bit better
than what had originally been forecast
now there is some good news out today
abs figures showing that last month 90
000 jobs were created around australia
and josh freidenberg in his press
conference said about 85 percent of the
workers who lost their jobs during the
crisis have now
regained work so that is of course um
you know reason to have some hope but
there are still many many australians
who don't have jobs and
you know an unemployment rate with a
seven in front of it is still a
tough labor market so one of the big
questions for the government as we head
into next year as we head into the next
budget
is what to do with the job seeker
unemployment benefit
right now it's being propped up with a
supplement so it's about seven hundred
and fifteen dollars a fortnight
it was 565 dollars a fortnight
pre-covered there's a lot of pressure on
the government to make that
increase permanent um here's how josh
breidenberg responded to questions today
on that very topic we've
extended that coronavirus supplement
again and that goes out to the end of
the march so we'll continue to monitor
the labor market situation but what we
want
to do is to get people from jobseeker
into work and that's why we have
targeted programs like the job maker
hiring credit so specifically which is
designed to support
young people so labor's not terribly
convinced by that argument
noting today that when the unemployment
rate peaks next year at seven and a half
percent in march
that is when jobseeker is expected to
snap back to the pre-covered level
here's the shadow finance minister katie
gallaher just a bit earlier
that's the other big glaring omission in
this you know this government has had
time after time update after update to
fix the problem of adequacy of jobseeker
there is 1.5 million australians relying
on that payment
and this government is happy to kick the
can down the road
probably into next year sometime or it
will be next year sometime before you
can give people certainty on that
forty dollars a day for a million and a
half australians that's what they're
being told for christmas this year from
scott morrison
that's the shadow finance minister katie
gallagher there kirsten talking about
well i suppose
putting pressure on the government to
make the increase to the job seeker
unemployment benefit permanent
the victorian ombudsman has found the
state government breached human rights
laws when it suddenly locked down public
housing towers in flemington and north
melbourne during the coronavirus
outbreak in july
reporter zalaka rizmal has the details
from north melbourne
today's findings by the victorian
ombudsman relate to events which took
place at the start of victoria's second
wave
on july the 4th amid a coronavirus
outbreak among
public housing tower residents 500
police were deployed across
nine public housing towers in
melbourne's north three thousand
residents were ordered under an
immediate hard lockdown with
no warning with some being detained for
up to 14 days in their homes
today the victorian ombudsman has found
that the state government
breached human rights laws she found
that while the lockdown itself was
justified
and successful in containing the
outbreak the sudden nature of the
lockdown was
problematic she found that the decision
to lock down immediately was made
without
direct public health advice here is some
of what she had to say
earlier today like the virus it sought
to contain
the immediacy of the lockdown risked the
health and well-being
of many people victoria's expert on
infectious diseases acting as chief
health officer that day
told us that although she signed the
lockdown directions
the timing was not on her advice
and she had less than 15 minutes to
review the directions
and their human rights implications
while the victorian ombudsman deborah
glass has recommended the state
government apologize to the public
housing tower residents
today the victorian government has come
out defending its actions
housing minister richard nguyen
maintaining the government did not act
illegally
while acknowledging it was a difficult
decision and one that caused distress
to the residents he maintained the
government had no choice with the virus
raging in the towers
and that while it was a difficult
decision it was made to save lives
here's some of what he had to say
earlier today we have got
uh 3 000 people were locked down across
those nine towers
uh we've got people who are very very
severely health compromised
uh and i think the call that was made
was absolutely the right call
to ensure the safety of of the residents
we make no apology for saving people's
lives
absolutely no apology for saving
people's lives today the deputy chief
health officer alan cheng has also come
out
responding to the report saying that
there was a sense of urgency and a need
to act at the time
referencing the fact that 10 percent of
people in the tower behind me
ultimately became infected with the
virus but he admitted
authorities could have been better
prepared
the trial of the northern territory
police officer charged with the murder
of an indigenous teenager in central
australia will be relocated from alice
springs
to darwin samantha johnson reports
it was a short hearing this morning at
the northern territory supreme court
in less than five minutes acting justice
dean mildred handed down his decision
that the trial of constable zachary
rolfe would be moved from here in alice
springs
to darwin constable rolfe has been
charged with murder over the shooting
death of indigenous teenager kumenji
walker
in the central australian community of
undmu last year the nt police officer
was committed to stand trial at the
alice springs supreme court
but last week defense counsel filed an
application to have the trial move to
darwin
defense counsel's arguments for the move
have been suppressed
but acting justice mildren has allowed
media to report that the basis of the
application
was the level of pretrial publicity and
comments in social media as having the
potential to risk the fair trial of the
accused
today acting justice mildren approved
that application
meaning the trial will be heard in
darwin fifteen hundred kilometers from
the yundamu community
he also said that there would be an avl
link of the proceedings here in alice
springs
it's great that the community has access
to
here and be part of what's happening
regardless of location
the trial has been set down to start on
the 19th of july 2021
and is expected to last for five weeks
the matter returns to court
at the end of february sydney swimming
coach kyle daniels
has been found not guilty of five
charges of sexually abusing a young
student
the jury has been asked to continue
deliberating on more than 20 other
charges but say there is a stalemate
it follows a lengthy trial in the new
south wales district court as jamie
mckinnell reports
kyle daniels has been on trial here at
the downing center in sydney now for
seven
weeks the 22 year old has pleaded not
guilty to 26 charges in total
which related to nine girls that he
taught at the mossman swim centre
between 2018 and 2019.
the trial has heard the complainants
were aged between 5 and ten at the time
now the jury had been deliberating for
about two and a half hours today before
they came back and returned
this partial result mr daniels has been
found not guilty of five
counts on the indictment which all
related to one girl who was aged
seven at the time and the charges he's
been acquitted of include multiple
counts of sexual intercourse with a
child
the judge kara sheed has asked the panel
to return to the jury room
and keep deliberating on the remaining
21 charges related to eight
other girls but the panel has indicated
that they've been at a stalemate
and that the disagreement in the jury
room has been strong
during the course of this trial the
crown prosecutor accused mr daniels
of having an interest in children which
he was prepared to opportunistically act
upon
for his own sexual gratification but his
defence team has highlighted
inconsistencies in the complainant's
accounts
suggested they might have been
unreliable and even suggested
they could have been influenced by
outside sources like media reports
and things that they overheard from
other parents or other students
fiji has been placed under a nationwide
curfew as cyclone yasa
threatens 95 per cent of the population
prime minister frank bynamorama urged
people to heed the warnings
and take the impacts of climate change
seriously
yasa is a category 5 storm
that could easily surpass the
record-breaking strength
of cyclone winston
the impact forecast for this latest
superstorm
is more or less the entire country
over 850 000 fijians
are in the direct path of the saturn
more than 95
of our population as the world is
getting warmer
these storms are getting stronger
every one of us must treat these climate
fuel catastrophes
with deadly seriousness kalosa
madaibalavu is a response coordinator
for live and learn care australia's
partner in fiji and he joins me now
from suva thank you very much for taking
the time to speak to abc news what are
conditions
like there now
thank you so much for having me in your
soul this evening
well we have been experiencing heavy
rain
since morning so there have been reports
of flooding all around the country
and people have been advised to move to
evacuation center if they live
in flood prone and also the strength of
the wind
is also getting stronger here in suva as
well as it has been reported from around
the country
thank you custom i can certainly hear
the rain
where you are right now are there enough
evacuation centers to house everyone who
needs
a safe place to shelter
yes uh custom there have been
there have been a lot of activations
that have taken place over the last
uh 12 hours and the government have
already been advocating and providing
that awareness
uh that for people to access uh
the evacuation center if they think that
they are unsafe
uh where their house are located so um
people have been taking heard of the
advice by the
and have been moving to evacuation
center in the last
12 hours have you heard of any reports
of anyone in trouble
so far um
not at the moment we have not received
any reports
of uh casualities uh in the last update
that we have been receiving
from the government as well as in our
news so uh
i'm not aware of any reports that have
that have come so far
of anyone being injured
the winds from tropical cyclone yasa are
forecast to top 200 kilometers
an hour what kind of damage
are you preparing to address in the
aftermath
the the damage will be huge uh as you've
heard about what the prime minister have
uh have said in his uh
press release that uh the the you know
looking back into
uh the previous cyclone that we have
come across tc winston
uh that was one of the biggest that had
hit the county
and there was a lot of damage in
infrastructures
um the the the the services
the that are available were disturbed
and a lot of houses were damaged so
it was a lot of impact in terms of uh
the livelihoods of people
the economic stabilities as well and
even there were a lot of uh
outbreak of diseases so that is
something that uh we are trying
our best uh as as a humanitarian
partners as well as
working together with the with the
authorities of the day to ensure that
you know our people are better prepared
um you know uh in the impacts that we
are anticipating after the cycle
cyclones are a regular occurrence in
fiji are there incentives
when rebuilding to rebuild homes to a
specific standard
that will withstand very strong winds
thank you um there's an ongoing
work ongoing process with our
authorities in terms of
uh the building standard uh to to
for for houses and buildings to adapt to
category 5 cyclones and they still need
to be a lot of walk a lot of work in
progress that is taking place
especially for our rural and maritime
areas uh
because most of the houses in our
maritime areas in our rural
areas they are just built without
building standards so these are
uh the the houses that you know are
usually um
affected during cyclones because they
they cannot
withstand catastrophic events like
cyclones do you expect it's going to be
more difficult to coordinate
international aid
that fiji may require in the aftermath
of this cyclone
because of the coronavirus pandemic
uh thank you um you know fiji have
have really adapted well
with when fiji was affected with covered
19 coronavirus but what i've received
since
what the country have received since
today is that the government have
already
declared a state of natural disaster for
the next
30 days uh and there will also be
regulations that will come with it
so you know it's already giving a clue
to
our uh our development developing
to our developing partners that you know
uh
fiji might not be able to cope with
these disasters so therefore we need
a lot of support in in these areas
in order to allow the country to cope
thank you
callosa madaibalavu care australia's
partner
in fiji for live and learn thank you for
speaking to us we wish you well
in the day ahead and we will endeavor to
keep in touch with you
to find out how it goes
thank you so much christian coronavirus
cases in japan
are soaring forcing the government to
suspend a domestic travel campaign aimed
at stimulating the economy yesterday was
the second worst day
on record with 3 000 new infections
that's at the end of a three-week period
dubbed critical
to contain the spread north asia
correspondent jake sturma reports from
tokyo
holidays are a time to travel see the
family and
wish for good luck at shinto shrines
which are busily preparing for an influx
of visitors
but this year it'll be a little
different many japanese are heating
health warnings coming
early to beat the crowds and kovid
a stark contrast to the two million
people who usually visit this shrine
in the first few days of each year
healthcare services will be strained if
the infection spreads
because of socializing during new years
people should spend their holidays
quietly
[Music]
with an eye on the economy the
government persisted with a scheme to
boost the domestic travel industry
despite mounting health warnings
but cases are spiking as winter sets in
and
people head indoors in one hospital
where 197 staff and patients tested
positive
it's even had to deploy military nurses
and it's now
suspended the travel subsidy scheme
travel should not necessarily be blamed
for a surge in new cases
but we will focus on measures to curb
the spread during the holiday period
suspending go-to travel was the right
decision however this will only prevent
the virus spreading in regional areas so
we need to reduce big gatherings in
cities like tokyo and osaka
restaurants are still doing all they can
to encourage customers to keep
coming in as safely as possible some
are delivering food by robots other
venues are going much more
low-tech this shop serves its food and
drinks with disposable face shields so
customers can
continue eating and drinking
uninterrupted
it's a pandemic prompted touch that
seems sure
to stick around jake sturmer abc news
tokyo time for a look at what's coming
up on the drum
here's tonight's host stan grant sydney
is on high alert as a covered cluster on
the city's northern beaches area grows
the race is on for health authorities to
find the source as queensland and
western australia warn that hard borders
could be imposed
and we'll look at the black lives matter
movement nearly seven months after
george floyd's death under the knee of a
white police officer what
if anything has changed all that and
more coming up on the drum i'm stan
grant
i'll see you soon and you can catch stan
and the drum on abc tv tonight at 6 pm
local time and at 9 00 pm eastern
daylight time on
the abc news channel and anytime on
iview
well this year celebrate 75 years of
women competing in the sydney to hobart
yacht race
some of the challenges include olympians
round-the-world sailors and youth
match racing champions chloe hart
reports from the cruising yacht club at
sydney harbour
in 1946 jane tate was the first woman to
finish
the sydney to hobart 75 years on more
than 160 female sailors
are competing in this year's blue water
classic
two of those female sailors are sisters
juliet and claire costanzo
the 21 and 24 year old are already
sailing champions in their own right
but this year is their first crack at
the sydney to hobart
it's going to be a really exciting one
being able to do it and have my sister
down there as well when we arrive
was pretty awesome well claire's on a
faster boat so she'll get there first
statistically speaking i should
win um but we'll say you really never
know what can happen it's
i guess you're out there in the open
ocean anything can happen stacy jackson
is competing in her 14th
sydney to hobart this year in 2018 she
was the first skipper of an
all-female crew and she's thrilled that
women had women now have better
opportunities
you know sailing has been a
male-dominated sport
through history it's definitely made
massive changes in the last few years
i've
i've managed to experience some of those
changes myself
it's definitely been accelerated with
the support of other sports
making like equal pay for women and
surfing and tennis so
sailing is following suit with that
which is um you know i'm
i'm a big supporter of and when i get to
sit alongside other women like this it
just shows that the level of
females in sailing is definitely growing
because of coronavirus this year's fleet
is significantly reduced
down to just 75 and there's just two
super maxies vying for line honours in
for track and blackjack
[Music]
you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.au
and on iview here are the top stories on
abc news
another case of covert 19 has been
diagnosed on sydney's northern beaches
bringing the
total number of infections to five the
latest is the partner of a woman who
works at a retirement village in
avalon the woman was one of two cases
announced this morning
authorities say the virus spread may
have originated at the avalon rsl
and they're urging anyone who attended
the club to get tested
the federal treasurer says the economy
is recovering faster than
expected but the road ahead is very
challenging a record deficit
of 214 billion dollars has been revised
down to 198 billion dollars
in part due to soaring iron oil prices
it comes as the unemployment rate fell
to 6.8
last month with data revealing around 90
jobs were created the victorian
ombudsman
has recommended the state government
apologize to 3 000
public housing tower residents people in
nine buildings in melbourne were
forbidden from leaving their homes for
at least five days in july
to contain a coronavirus outbreak the
ombudsman has concluded the sudden
lockdown breached human rights
it was not based on health advice and
should have started the next day
to allow time to plan for food supplies
australia is off to a strong start and
the first test against india at
adelaide oval mitchell starts an opening
batsman with the shaw back to the stands
for a duck on just the second ball
before pat cummins took another wicket
for the home side
india is currently 2 for 40 at the break
it's
the first time the two sides have faced
off in a day night test
encounter let's take a closer look at
the coronavirus situation
in new south wales now with abc analyst
casey briggs
in the words of the state's health
minister brad hazard we do have
uh really at least four potential cases
of community transmission in the state
it's been a very long time since we've
seen
community transmission in new south
wales some of those
unknown source cases under investigation
cases may well be linked
but this is a little bit of worry and we
have a confluence really of a few cases
that all
you know have the potential to be a
little bit nasty six
over two days have been found now uh
let's just step through them one that uh
that van driver that is
has an apparent link to uh
some overseas air crew that would seem
to be the most likely source of
infection for them and then five
other cases one a woman who works in an
age
care home that's a concern obviously her
partner
and then a man who is a musician who's
played across
a series of venues and a couple of other
cases
as well largely in the northern beaches
areas of
sydney and as a whole those cases
there's a working hypothesis that
they're all linked
together or at least most of them are
linked together through the avalon
rsl but the the emergence of that if
that hypothesis proves to be the case
the emergence of that suspected cluster
we still don't know where that came from
and that is a little bit of a concern
whether it is the case that you know
there has been a little bit of this
virus still hanging around in the
community for quite some time
we haven't had community transmission
since around about here late october
on the chart in new south wales weather
there's just a little bit of virus been
hanging around that's that's
kept its head low and then just popped
up now on the northern beaches
or whether this has been another breach
of
of quarantine or an escape from our
quarantine process as i should probably
say
uh an overseas strain of the virus and
we'll need to see
when that genomic sequencing comes back
exactly what that says that will be the
biggest clue
as to which of those scenarios we're
dealing with so the big question
when are we likely to know those results
yeah and the state's been relatively
quick you know nationally it's been it's
been getting quite quick to get genomic
sequencing results
out of uh the labs uh 24 to 48 hours has
been the period we're expecting some
at least some information maybe around
about seven o'clock tonight
the chief health officer in new south
wales dr carrie chan said
the machine which is doing the genomic
sequencing that's set to ping that's set
to finish at 5
21 pm today and then it takes maybe 90
minutes to you know get and interpret
and analyze those results so maybe about
seven o'clock we'll hear more
about uh where this virus came from from
new south wales that's one of the key
things that we're watching for and then
the other
is just trying to work out where this
virus came from and if it can be linked
back to a known source we're obviously
feeling quite a lot better
in the lead-up to christmas than we
would be if this remains unknown source
community transmission
for more i'm now joined by local avalon
resident tamara
sloper harding good afternoon and
welcome thank you
for joining us this afternoon take me
through the implications of these new
coronavirus cases for your family
well it's it's been a bit more than
inconvenient to us
really because three of my four kids had
to be tested today
um because they've been at venues in the
local community
but the saddest part for us is that our
local clubs evelyn rsl and the bolo have
really done a tremendous job all year
to keep the community safe and it's just
such a shame
now when things are starting to open up
again for local business
that this would happen because um the
community here really rally around each
other and support each other and it's
fantastic and today
you could really see it with the number
of people going out to get tested um
they're doing the right thing
so for me personally i'm quite sad
because i've watched my friends and
colleagues
at both clubs working really hard all
year and now this is such a shame just
before christmas
i understand that you have a connection
to that local
rsl you're the vice president of the sub
branch
can you give us a feel or give us an
idea of the feeling
among locals up there just the degree of
concern right now
um there was a little bit of panic
earlier but because the pop-up testing
stations happened
quite quickly people have been down
there doing that so we're reassured that
we're being looked after
um my role in the rsl sub branch at
avalon beacher so it's
more looking after veterans um there's
two arms to the rsl and a lot of people
aren't aware of that there's the club
side which is the rsl club
limited and then there's the traditional
rsl
sub branch side which is looking after
veterans and their welfare
which at the moment is um really
important because there's a lot of
challenges facing veterans this time of
year
so this covered now is just another one
of those things that we're going to have
to deal with
but the community is doing a really good
job and
i'm impressed and have you been in touch
with any
veterans today about the challenges now
facing the local community